# Berkeley Ordinance 7,974-N.S. amending BMC Chapter 13.63 (coordinated pricing algorithms) | Berkeley Mun. Code ch. 13.63 (Ord. 7,974-N.S.) | https://berkeleyca.gov/sites/default/files/documents/2025-07-08%20Item%2001%20Amendments%20to%20Ordinance%20Prohibiting.pdf | retrieved 2026-10-04

Page 1 of 4

01

ORDINANCE NO. 7,974-N.S.
AMENDING CHAPTER 13.63 OF THE BERKELEY MUNICIPAL CODE PROHIBITING
THE SALE OR USE OF COORDINATED PRICING ALGORITHMS TO SET RENTS OR
MANAGE OCCUPANCY LEVELS FOR RESIDENTIAL DWELLING UNITS
BE IT ORDAINED by the Council of the City of Berkeley as follows:
Section 1. That Berkeley Municipal Code 13.63 is amended to read as follows:
Chapter 13.63
PROHIBITION ON THE SALE OR USE OF COORDINATED PRICING ALGORITHMS
TO SET RENTS OR MANAGE OCCUPANCY LEVELS FOR RESIDENTIAL
DWELLING UNITS
Sections:
13.63.010 Findings and Purpose
13.63.020 Definitions
13.63.030 Use and Sale of Coordinated Pricing Algorithms Prohibited
13.63.040 Remedies
13.63.050 Undertaking for the General Welfare
13.63.060 Severability
13.63.070 Effective Date
13.63.010

Findings and purpose.

The Council hereby finds and determines that the adoption of this chapter is
necessary to the promotion of the public health, safety, and welfare.
A. In recent years, a number of new software programs, often referred to as
“algorithmic devices”, have threatened to destabilize rental housing markets in cities
nationwide, including the City of Berkeley.
B. These programs enable landlords to indirectly coordinate with one another
through the sharing of non-public competitively sensitive data in order to artificially
inflate rents and vacancy rates for rental housing. Participating landlords provide vast
amounts of proprietary data to the programs, which in turn set or provide
recommendations for rent and occupancy levels.
C. More and more landlords in U.S. cities now pool their data and pricing decisions
using such software.
D. The software has contributed to double-digit rent increases (over the last nine
years, median rents have increased 19% in the East Bay), higher vacancy rates, and
higher rates of eviction, and has generally distorted markets so that rents and vacancy
rates have increased in tandem.

Ordinance No. 7,974-N.S.

Page 1 of 4

Page 2 of 4

E. Often used by large corporate landlords, the software fuels the consolidation of
corporate and private equity ownership of rental housing, at the expense of landlords
large and small who are willing to play by the normal rules. Landlords using these tools
are not engaging in appropriate market behavior. And the companies developing and
selling these tools to Berkeley landlords are not doing so either, and are contributing to
these problems.
F. A 2022 class action lawsuit filed in the U.S. District Court in the Western District
of Washington at Seattle (one of over 20 private class action lawsuits that have been
consolidated into one case) accuses nearly 50 trade associations - including the East
Bay Rental Housing Association and the Berkeley Property Owners Association – of
serving as “conduits of the cartel” by providing a venue for RealPage and their property
owners to conspire. The lawsuit further alleges that landlords use the software to
agree on prices to set for rent, and to stagger their lease renewal dates so as to avoid
any oversupplies in rental properties.
G. Numerous antitrust lawsuits have been filed against certain of these companies,
including RealPage, Inc. and Yardi Systems, Inc. The lawsuits allege that these
companies are enabling and participating in a scheme of unlawful rent-fixing. These
include a lawsuit filed by the District of Columbia Attorney General in November 2023, a
lawsuit filed by the Arizona Attorney General in February 2024, and more than 20
federal private class action lawsuits filed nationwide that have been consolidated in the
federal court in the Middle District of Tennessee. In August 2024, The United States
Department of Justice, alongside the attorneys general of California and seven other
states, filed an antitrust lawsuit against RealPage, accusing the company of reducing
competition among landlords and taking over the market for such algorithm-based rental
software.
H. Instead of waiting for court processes which may take years to resolve, this
ordinance prohibits the sale or use of algorithmic devices for the purpose of setting
rents on residential dwelling units in the city of Berkeley, to bring immediate relief to
Berkeley tenants, as well as to put landlords who have been using these devices on
equal footing with those who are willing to adhere to fair standards for setting rental
rates.
I. This Chapter is not intended to prevent the development or sale of software to
help landlords manage their units generally or through the use of public data. Nor does
this Chapter regulate the amount of rent that a landlord may charge. This Chapter
solely regulates the use and sale of the algorithmic devices that analyze and share nonpublic data, to prevent the harms described above.
13.63.020
Definitions.
A. “Coordinated pricing algorithm” means any analytical or computation processes
that use data to recommend or predict the price of consumer goods or services in direct
or indirect coordination with one or more competitors, including through a third-party
vendor such as a software program that uses one or more algorithms to perform
calculations of competitor data concerning local or statewide rents or occupancy levels,
for the purpose of advising landlords whether to leave their units vacant or on the
amount of rent that landlords may obtain from tenants. "Coordinated pricing algorithm"
includes a product that incorporates a coordinated pricing algorithm, but does not

Ordinance No. 7,974-N.S.

Page 2 of 4

Page 3 of 4

include (a) any report published by a trade association that receives renter data and
publishes it in an aggregated and anonymous manner or (b) a product used for the
purpose of establishing rent or income limits in accordance with the affordable housing
guidelines of a local government, the state, the federal government, or other political
subdivision.
B. “Competitor data” means information, including information about actual rent
prices, occupancy rates, lease start and end dates, and similar data, regardless whether
the information is attributable to a specific competitor or anonymized, and regardless
whether it is derived from or otherwise provided by another person that competes in the
same market or a related market.
13.63.030
Use and sale of coordinated pricing algorithms prohibited.
A. It shall be unlawful to sell, license, or otherwise provide to city of Berkeley
landlords any coordinated pricing algorithm that sets, recommends, or advises on rents
or occupancy levels that may be achieved for residential dwelling units in the city of
Berkeley.
B. It shall be unlawful for a landlord to use a coordinated pricing algorithm described
in subsection A when setting rents or occupancy levels for residential dwelling units in
the city of Berkeley. Each separate month that a violation exists or continues, and each
separate residential dwelling unit for which the landlord used the coordinated pricing
algorithm, shall constitute a separate and distinct violation.
13.63.040
Remedies.
A. The City Attorney may file a civil action for violations of section 13.63.030,
subsections A and/or B, for damages, injunctive relief, restitution/return of illegal profits,
and/or civil penalties of up to $1,000 per violation. The court shall award reasonable
attorney’s fees and costs to the city Attorney if the City Attorney is the prevailing party in
such a civil action.
B. A tenant may file a civil action for violations of section 13.63.030, subsection B,
for injunctive relief, money damages, and/or civil penalties of up to $1,000 per violation.
The court shall award reasonable attorney’s fees and costs to the tenant if the tenant is
the prevailing party in such a civil action. A lease provision that limits a prevailing
tenant from obtaining attorneys’ fees shall not be enforceable against a tenant’s claim
for attorneys’ fees that arises under this subsection 13.63.040 B.
13.63.050
Undertaking for the general welfare.
In enacting and implementing this Chapter 13.63, the City is assuming an
undertaking only to promote the general welfare. It is not assuming, nor is it imposing
on its officers and employees, an obligation for breach of which it is liable in money
damages to any person who claims that such breach proximately caused injury.
13.63.060
Severability.
If any part or provision of this Chapter, or the application of this Chapter to any
person or circumstance, is held invalid, the remainder of this Chapter, including the
application of such part or provision to other persons or circumstances, shall not be

Ordinance No. 7,974-N.S.

Page 3 of 4

Page 4 of 4

affected by such a holding and shall continue in full force and effect. To this end, the
provisions of this Chapter are severable.
13.63.070
Effective Date.
The provisions of this Chapter shall not take effect until March 1, 2026.
Section 2. Copies of this Ordinance shall be posted for two days prior to adoption in the
display case located near the walkway in front of the Maudelle Shirek Building, 2134
Martin Luther King Jr. Way. Within 15 days of adoption, copies of this Ordinance shall
be filed at each branch of the Berkeley Public Library and the title shall be published in
a newspaper of general circulation.
At a regular meeting of the Council of the City of Berkeley held on June 24, 2025,
this Ordinance was passed to print and ordered published by posting by the following
vote:
Ayes:

Bartlett, Blackaby, Humbert, Kesarwani, Lunaparra, O’Keefe, Taplin,
Tregub, and Ishii.

Noes:

None.

Absent:

None.

Ordinance No. 7,974-N.S.

Page 4 of 4
