# Santa Ana Rent Stabilization and Just Cause Eviction Ordinance, Municipal Code Chapter 8 Article XIX | Santa Ana Mun. Code ch. 8, art. XIX (§§ 8-3100 et seq.) | https://library.municode.com/ca/santa_ana/codes/code_of_ordinances?nodeId=PTIITHCO_CH8BUST_ARTXIXRESTJUCAEVOR | retrieved 2026-10-04

ARTICLE XIX. - RENT STABILIZATION AND JUST CAUSE EVICTION ORDINANCE

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY

Sec. 8-3100 - Title.

This Article shall be known in its entirety as the "City of Santa Ana Rent Stabilization
and Just Cause Eviction Ordinance" and, for the sake of convenience, as the "Rent
Stabilization and Just Cause Eviction Ordinance."

(Ord. No. NS-3027, § 3, 10-18-22; Ord. No. NS-3073, § 1, 11-5-24)

Sec. 8-3101. - Reserved.

Editor's note—
Ord. No. NS-3073, § 1, adopted November 5, 2024, repealed § 8-3101. Former § 8-3101 pertained to background
and derived from Ord. No. NS-3027, § 3, adopted October 18, 2022.

Sec. 8-3102. - Definitions.

a)

For purposes of this Article, the words and phrases shall be defined as set forth
herein, unless the context clearly indicates a different meaning is intended.

b)

Words and phrases used in this Article, which are not specifically defined, shall
be construed according to their context and the customary usage of the language.

c)

Words and phrases defined:

"Annual Allowable Rent Adjustment" means the limit on the Maximum Allowable Rent Increase,
which a Landlord may charge on any Rental Unit each year.

"Capital Improvement" means an improvement, addition or major repair to a Rental Unit
that were paid for and completed after November 19, 2021 (the effective date of the
first adopted Rent Stabilization Ordinance), provided such new improvement, addition
or major repair has a useful life of five (5) years or more and that is required to
be amortized over the useful life of the improvement, such as: structural, electrical,
plumbing, or mechanism system, roofing, carpeting, draperies, stuccoing the outside
of a building, air conditioning, security gates, swimming pool, sauna or hot tub,
fencing, children's play equipment permanently installed, the complete exterior painting
of a building, and other similar improvements as defined under the straight line depreciation
provisions of the Internal Revenue Code and the regulations issued pursuant thereto
and determined by the Rental Housing Board. Capital Improvement does not include normal
or routine maintenance, repair, replacements, and/or deterioration resulting from
an unreasonable delay in the undertaking of completion or after a Notice of Violation
by a government agency ordering repairs.

"City" means the City of Santa Ana.

"Hearing Officer" means a person who has been appointed by the Program Administrator
to perform the duties set forth in this Article.

"Housing Services" means those services provided and associated with the use or occupancy
of a Rental Unit including, but not limited to, insurance, repairs, replacement, maintenance,
effective waterproofing and weather protection, painting, providing light, heat, hot
and cold water, elevator service, window shades and screens, laundry facilities and
privileges, janitorial services, utilities that are paid by the Landlord, refuse removal,
allowing pets, telephone, parking, storage, the right to have a specified number of
Tenants or occupants, computer technologies, entertainment technologies, including
cable or satellite television services, and any other benefits, privileges or facilities
connected with the use or occupancy of such Rental Unit including a proportionate
share of the services provided to common facilities of the building in which such
Rental Unit is located and/or of the property on which such Rental Unit is located.

"Landlord" or "Owner" means an owner of record, lessor, sublessor or any person, partnership,
corporation, family trust, or any other business entity, or any successor in interest
thereto, offering for rent or lease any Rental Unit or Mobilehome or Mobilehome Space
in a Mobilehome Park in the City and shall include the employee, agent or representative
of the Landlord if the agent or representative has the full authority to answer for
the Landlord and enter into binding agreements on behalf of the Landlord.

"Mediator" means a person whom the Program Administrator determines meets all of the
following criteria:

1)

Has received forty (40) to eighty (80) hours of formal training in mediation, including
training in anti-racism, elimination of bias, diversity, equity, inclusion, and cultural
competency; and,

2)

Has mediated Rent disputes and/or has had other experience or training showing a capability
to mediate the issues which arise in landlord/tenant disputes.

"Mobilehome" means a structure designed for human habitation and for being moved on
a street or highway under permit pursuant to Section 35790 of the Vehicle Code. Mobilehome
includes a manufactured home, as defined in Section 18007 of the Health and Safety
Code, and a Mobilehome, as defined in Section 18008 of the Health and Safety Code,
but does not include a recreational vehicle, as defined in Section 799.29 of this
code and Section 18010 of the Health and Safety Code or a commercial coach as defined
in Section 18001.8 of the Health and Safety Code.

"Mobilehome Space" means the rental of a spot for a Mobilehome within a Mobilehome
Park by a homeowner, as defined in Civil Code section 798.9, or a resident, as defined
in Civil Code section 798.11.

"Mobilehome Park" means an area of land where two (2) or more Mobilehome Spaces are
rented, or held out for rent, to accommodate Mobilehomes used for human habitation.

"Net Operating Income" means the net revenue received by the Landlord after paying
the normal Operating Expenses (gross revenue less normal operating expenses).

"Operating Expenses" means the costs of normal operations, including, but not limited
to, management, taxes, insurance, maintenance, repairs and other recurring costs.

"Program Administrator" is a person designated by the City Manager to administer the
provisions of this Article.

"Rental Registry Fee" or "Fee" means the fee the City imposes on each Rental Unit
to cover the costs to administer the provisions of this Article.

"Rent" means all periodic compensation, including all non-monetary consideration,
that a Tenant provides to a Landlord concerning the use or occupancy of a Rental Unit,
including any amount included in the Rent for utilities (unless separately billed
to the Tenant by the utility company), parking, storage, pets or for any other fee
or charge associated with the Tenancy for the use or occupancy of a Rental Unit and
related Housing Services. Rent includes, without limitation, the fair market value
of goods accepted, labor performed, or services rendered. With respect to Mobilehomes
and Mobilehome Spaces in Mobilehome Parks, any regulations of rent, fees, and costs
included within the Mobilehome Residency Law, Civil Code section 798, et seq., shall
be incorporated into the definition of Rent, as applicable.

"Rent Increase" means any additional Rent demanded of or paid by a Tenant for a Rental
Unit, including any reduction in Housing Services without a corresponding reduction
in the amount demanded or paid for Rent; or a pro rata increase in costs of Housing
Services apportioned to a Rental Unit.

"Rental Agreement" means a lease, sublease, or other agreement, written, oral or implied,
between a Landlord and a Tenant for the use and/or occupancy of a Rental Unit and
for Housing Services. With respect to Mobilehomes and Mobilehome Spaces in Mobilehome
Parks, any regulations of rental agreements or leases within the Mobilehome Residency
Law, Civil Code section 798, et seq., shall be incorporated into the definition of
Rental Agreement, as applicable.

"Rental Housing Board" or "Board" means the Rental Housing Board established by Division
5 of this Article XIX of Chapter 8 of the Santa Ana Municipal Code.

"Rental Registry" means the database or portal where Landlords register Rental Units,
update Rental Unit information, update Tenancy information, submit notices, and pay
the Rental Registry Fee.

"Rental Unit" means any building, structure, or part thereof, or any Mobilehome and
Mobilehome Spaces in a Mobilehome Park, offered or available for rent for residential
use or occupancy in the City, including the land appurtenant thereto, together with
all Housing Services in connection with the use or occupancy thereof, including common
areas and recreational facilities held out for use by the Tenant, which is not exempt
pursuant to the exemptions set forth in this Article.

"Residential Real Property" or "Residential Property" means any housing unit, including
a room or group of rooms designed and intended for occupancy by one or more persons,
including a Rental Unit and a Mobilehome or Mobilehome Space in a Mobilehome Park,
offered for rent or lease in the City.

"Tenancy" means the right or entitlement of a Tenant to use or occupy a Rental Unit,
including a Mobilehome or Mobilehome Space in a Mobilehome Park.

"Tenant" means any renter, tenant, subtenant, lessee, sub-lessee, roommate with Landlord's
consent, or any other person or entity entitled under the terms of a Rental Agreement,
or by sufferance, or by state or federal law, to the use or occupancy of any Rental
Unit and (i) has the legal responsibility for the payment of Rent for a Rental Unit
or (ii) has agreed to pay the Rent for a Rental Unit.

(Ord. No. NS-3027, § 3, 10-18-22; Ord. No. NS-3073, § 1, 11-5-24)

Sec. 8-3103. - Implementing regulations, policies and procedures.

The City Manager or Program Administrator shall have the authority to promulgate regulations,
policies and procedures to implement the requirements and fulfill the purposes of
this Article. No person shall fail to comply with such regulations, policies and procedures.

(Ord. No. NS-3027, § 3, 10-18-22; Ord. No. NS-3052, § 3, 10-17-23; Ord. No. NS-3073, § 1, 11-5-24)

Sec. 8-3104. - Mobilehome residency law.

The provisions of this Article shall not supersede the regulations of the state Mobilehome
Residency Law, Civil Code section 798, et seq., as applicable. If there is any conflict
between the terms of this Article and the Mobilehome Residency Law, the Mobilehome
Residency Law shall prevail.

(Ord. No. NS-3027, § 3, 10-18-22; Ord. No. NS-3073, § 1, 11-5-24)

Secs. 8-3105—8-3119. - Reserved.

DIVISION 2. - JUST CAUSE EVICTIONS

Sec. 8-3120. - Restrictions on termination of tenancy without just cause.

(a)

After a Tenant has continuously and lawfully occupied a Residential Real Property
for thirty (30) days, the Owner of the Residential Real Property shall not terminate
the Tenancy without just cause, which shall be stated in the written notice to terminate
Tenancy. The provisions of this section related to the termination of Tenants shall
not apply to Mobilehomes or Mobilehome Spaces in Mobilehome Parks subject to the termination
provisions of the Mobilehome Residency Law, Civil Code section 798.56, as applicable.

1)

The Owner shall post a notice on a form prescribed by the City, providing information
about the existence of this Division 2 of Article XIX of Chapter 8 of the Santa Ana Municipal Code, including protections related to immigration or
citizenship status of Tenant found under Civil Code section 1940.35 and Code of Civil
Procedure section 1161.4, as may be amended. Notice must be posted in a conspicuous
location on the property. The notice shall be written in the language that the Owner
and Tenant used to negotiate the terms of the Tenancy (e.g., Spanish, Chinese, Tagalog,
Vietnamese and Korean), as well as English.

2)

In addition to all other notice requirements specified elsewhere in this Division,
the Owner of any Residential Real Property or Mobilehome Space, is required to provide
written notice to Tenants of their rights under this Division as follows:

A.

The notice required by this Division must be on a form prescribed by the City and
include the following information:

i.

The existence and scope of this Division 2 of Article XIX of Chapter 8 of the Santa Ana Municipal Code; and,

ii.

The right to relocation assistance in limited circumstances pursuant to subsection
(d)(2) herein.

B.

The Owner must provide Tenant with the notice upon serving any notice of change in
terms of Tenancy.

C.

The Owner must provide the notice on or before the commencement of all Tenancies initiated
after the effective date of this Division.

(b)

For purposes of this section, "just cause" includes either of the following:

1)

At-fault just cause, which is any of the following:

A.

Default in the payment of Rent.

B.

A breach of a material term of the lease, as described in paragraph (3) of Section
1161 of the Code of Civil Procedure, including, but not limited to, violation of a
provision of the lease after being issued a written notice to correct the violation.
A "breach of a material term" shall not include:

i.

The obligation to limit occupancy, provided that the additional occupant who joins
the Tenant of the Residential Real Property thereby exceeding the limits on occupancy
set forth in the lease is:

I.

A dependent under age eighteen (18); or

II.

A replacement Tenant who moved in after an approved Tenant vacated the Residential
Real Property, so long as the addition does not exceed the Uniform Housing Code.

i.

The Owner shall have the right to approve or deny the prospective additional or replacement
Tenant, who is not a minor dependent child, provided that the Owner does not unreasonably
withhold approval. If the Owner fails to respond to the Tenant in writing with a description
of the reasons for the denial of the request within a reasonable amount of time of
receipt of the Tenant's written request, the Tenant's request shall be deemed approved
by the Owner if the lease is for a period of one (1) year or less.

ii.

A change in the terms of the Tenancy that is not the result of an express written
agreement signed by both of the parties. An Owner is not required to obtain a Tenant's
written consent to a change in the terms of the Tenancy if the change in the terms
of the Tenancy is authorized by this section, or if the Owner is required to change
the terms of the Tenancy pursuant to federal, State, or local law. Nothing in this
subsection shall exempt an Owner from providing legally required notice of a change
in the terms of the Tenancy.

C.

Maintaining, committing, or permitting the maintenance or commission of a nuisance
as described in paragraph (4) of Section 1161 of the Code of Civil Procedure.

D.

Committing waste as described in paragraph (4) of Section 1161 of the Code of Civil
Procedure.

E.

The Tenant had a written lease that terminated on or after the effective date of this
Ordinance, and after a written request or demand from the Owner, the Tenant has refused
to execute a written extension or renewal of the lease for an additional term of similar
duration with similar provisions, provided that those terms do not violate this section
or any other provision of law.

F.

Criminal activity by the Tenant on the Residential Real Property, including any common
areas, or any criminal activity or criminal threat, as defined in subdivision (a)
of Section 422 of the Penal Code, on or off the Residential Real Property, that is
directed at any Owner or agent of the Owner of the Residential Real Property or members
of Tenant's household or other Tenants of the Residential Real Property. This at-fault,
just cause provision shall apply if the Owner has, within a reasonable time, reported
the criminal activity to law enforcement. Further, at-fault, just cause eviction of
a Tenant under this provision shall only apply to that Tenant who committed the criminal
activity described herein. If a Tenant is acquitted or found not guilty of the charges
giving rise to eviction, or if charges are not filed against the Tenant within the
applicable statute of limitations period, the Tenant shall be offered the right to
restore the Tenancy only if the same Residential Real Property is available.

G.

Assigning or subletting the premises in violation of the Tenant's lease, as described
in paragraph (4) of Section 1161 of the Code of Civil Procedure.

i.

Notwithstanding any contrary provision in this section, an Owner shall not take any
action to terminate a Tenancy based on a Tenant's sublease of the Residential Real
Property if all the following requirements are met:

I.

The Tenant requests permission from the Owner in writing to sublease the Residential
Real Property;

II.

The Tenant continues to reside in the Residential Real Property as their primary residence;

III.

The sublease replaces one (1) or more departed Tenants under the lease on a one-for-one
basis; and

IV.

The Owner fails to respond to the Tenant in writing within a reasonable amount of
time of the receipt of the Tenant's written request. If the Owner fails to respond
to the Tenant's written request, the request shall be deemed approved by the Owner
if the lease is for a period of one (1) year or less. An Owner's reasonable refusal
of the Tenant's written request may be based on, but is not limited to, the ground
that the total number of occupants in a Residential Real Property exceeds the maximum
number of occupants as determined under Section 503(b) of the Uniform Housing Code or successor provision.

H.

The Tenant's refusal to allow the Owner to enter the Residential Real Property as
authorized by Sections 1101.5 and 1954 of the Civil Code, and Sections 13113.7 and
17926.1 of the Health and Safety Code.

I.

Using the premises for an unlawful purpose as described in paragraph (4) of Section
1161 of the Code of Civil Procedure.

J.

The employee, agent, or licensee's failure to vacate after their termination as an
employee, agent, or a licensee as described in paragraph (1) of Section 1161 of the
Code of Civil Procedure.

K.

When the Tenant fails to deliver possession of the Residential Real Property after
providing the Owner written notice as provided in Section 1946 of the Civil Code of
the Tenant's intention to terminate the hiring of the real property, or makes a written
offer to surrender that is accepted in writing by the Owner but fails to deliver possession
at the time specified in that written notice as described in paragraph (5) of Section
1161 of the Code of Civil Procedure.

2)

No-fault just cause, which includes any of the following:

A.

i.

Intent to occupy the Residential Real Property by the Owner or their spouse, domestic
partner, children, grandchildren, parents, or grandparents.

ii.

For leases entered into on or after the effective date of this Ordinance, this subsection
shall apply only if the Tenant agrees, in writing, to the termination, or if a provision
of the lease allows the Owner to terminate the lease if the Owner, or their spouse,
domestic partner, children, grandchildren, parents, or grandparents unilaterally decides
to occupy the Residential Real Property for a period of at least twenty-four (24)
months, as affirmed by the Owner in a written affidavit submitted to the City. Addition
of a provision allowing the Owner to terminate the lease as described in this clause
to a new or renewed Rental Agreement or fixed-term lease constitutes a similar provision
for the purposes of subparagraph (E) of paragraph (1).

B.

Withdrawal of the Residential Real Property from the rental market for an anticipated
period of at least twenty-four (24) months, as affirmed by the Owner in a written
affidavit submitted to the City.

C.

i.

The Owner complying with any of the following:

I.

An order issued by a government agency or court relating to habitability that necessitates
vacating the Residential Real Property.

II.

An order issued by a government agency or court to vacate the Residential Real Property.

III.

A local ordinance that necessitates vacating the Residential Real Property.

ii.

If it is determined by any government agency or court that the Tenant is at fault
for the condition or conditions triggering the order or need to vacate under clause
(i), the Tenant shall not be entitled to relocation assistance as outlined in paragraph
(3) of subdivision (d).

D.

i.

Intent to demolish or to substantially remodel the Residential Real Property.

ii.

I.

The Owner shall provide advance notice to the Tenant of the ability to reoccupy the
unit upon completion of the repairs, or if requested by the Tenant, the right of first
refusal to any comparable vacant Rental Unit which has been offered at comparable
Rent owned by the Owner; and

II.

In the event the Owner seeks to rent the remodeled unit within six (6) months following
the completion of the remodeling work, the evicted Tenant shall have the right of
first refusal to reoccupy and rent the unit, unless the Owner provides a written waiver
by the Tenant of their right to reoccupy the premises pursuant to this subsection.

iii.

For purposes of this subparagraph, "substantially remodel" means the replacement or
substantial modification of any structural, electrical, plumbing, or mechanical system
that requires a permit from a governmental agency, or the abatement of hazardous materials,
including lead-based paint, mold, or asbestos, in accordance with applicable federal,
State, and local laws, that cannot be reasonably accomplished in a safe manner with
the Tenant in place and that requires the Tenant to vacate the Residential Real Property
for at least thirty (30) days. Cosmetic improvements alone, including painting, decorating,
and minor repairs, or other work that can be performed safely without having the Residential
Real Property vacated, do not qualify as a substantial remodel.

(c)

Before an Owner of Residential Real Property issues a notice to terminate a Tenancy
for just cause that is a curable lease violation, the Owner shall first give notice
of the violation to the Tenant with an opportunity to cure the violation pursuant
to paragraph (3) of Section 1161 of the Code of Civil Procedure. If the violation
is not cured within the time period set forth in the notice, a three-day notice to
quit without an opportunity to cure may thereafter be served to terminate the Tenancy.

1)

Any written notice to cease or correct must:

A.

Be dated and served upon the Tenant, pursuant to at least one of the methods authorized
under California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1162, as may be amended;

B.

Inform the Tenant that failure to cure may result in the initiation of eviction proceedings;

C.

Inform the Tenant of the right to request a reasonable accommodation;

D.

Inform the Tenant of the contact number for the Program Administrator; and

E.

Include a specific statement of the reasons for the written notice to cease or correct
with specific facts to help the Tenant determine the date(s), place(s), witness(es),
and circumstance(s) that support the reason(s) for the eviction.

(d)

1)

For a Tenancy for which just cause is required to terminate the Tenancy under subdivision
(a), if an Owner of Residential Real Property issues a termination notice based on
a no-fault just cause described in paragraph (2) of subdivision (b), the Owner shall,
regardless of the Tenant's income, at the Owner's option, do one of the following:

A.

Assist the Tenant to relocate by providing a direct payment to the Tenant as described
in paragraph 3; or

B.

Waive in writing the payment of Rent for the final three (3) months of the Tenancy,
prior to the Rent becoming due.

2)

If an Owner issues a notice to terminate a Tenancy for no-fault just cause, the Owner
shall notify the Tenant of the Tenant's right to relocation assistance or Rent waiver
and all other rights pursuant to this section. If the Owner elects to waive the Rent
for the final three (3) month of the Tenancy as provided in subparagraph (B) of paragraph
(1), the notice shall state the amount of Rent waived and that no Rent is due for
the final three (3) months of the Tenancy.

3)

A.

The amount of relocation assistance or Rent waiver shall be equal to three (3) months
of the Tenant's Rent that was in effect when the Owner issued the notice to terminate
the Tenancy. Any relocation assistance shall be provided within fifteen (15) calendar
days of service of the notice.

B.

If a Tenant fails to vacate after the expiration of the notice to terminate the Tenancy,
the actual amount of any relocation assistance or Rent waiver provided pursuant to
this subdivision shall be recoverable as damages in an action to recover possession.

C.

The relocation assistance or Rent waiver required by this section shall be credited
against any other relocation assistance required by any other law.

4)

An Owner's failure to strictly comply with this section shall render the notice of
termination void.

(e)

This section shall not apply to the following types of residential real properties
or residential circumstances:

1)

Transient and tourist hotel occupancy as defined in subdivision (b) of Section 1940
of the Civil Code.

2)

Housing accommodations in a nonprofit hospital, religious facility, extended care
facility, licensed residential care facility for the elderly, as defined in Section
1569.2 of the Health and Safety Code, or an adult residential facility, as defined
in Chapter 6 of Division 6 of Title 22 of the Manual of Policies and Procedures published by the
State Department of Social Services.

3)

Dormitories owned and operated by an institution of higher education or a kindergarten
and grades 1 to 12, inclusive, school.

4)

Housing accommodations in which the Tenant shares bathroom or kitchen facilities with
the Owner who maintains their principal residence at the Residential Real Property.

5)

Single-family Owner-occupied residences, including a residence in which the Owner-occupant
rents or leases no more than two (2) units or bedrooms, including, but not limited
to, an accessory dwelling unit or a junior accessory dwelling unit.

6)

A duplex in which the Owner occupied one (1) of the units as the Owner's principal
place of residence at the beginning of the Tenancy, so long as the Owner continues
in occupancy.

7)

Housing that has been issued a certificate of occupancy within the previous fifteen
(15) years.

8)

Residential Real Property that is alienable separate from the title to any other dwelling
unit, provided that both of the following apply:

A.

The Owner is not any of the following:

i.

A real estate investment trust, as defined in Section 856 of the Internal Revenue
Code.

ii.

A corporation.

iii.

A limited liability company in which at least one member is a corporation.

B.

i.

The Tenants have been provided written notice that the Residential Property is exempt
from this section using the following statement: "This property is not subject to
the just cause requirements of Santa Ana Municipal Code Chapter 8, Article XIX, Division 2. This property meets the requirements of Santa Ana Municipal
Code section 8-3120(e)(8) and the Owner is not any of the following: (1) a real estate investment trust,
as defined by Section 856 of the Internal Revenue Code; (2) a corporation; or (3)
a limited liability company in which at least one member is a corporation."

ii.

For a Tenancy existing before the effective date of this Ordinance, the notice required
under clause (i) may, but is not required to, be provided in the Rental Agreement.

iii.

For any Tenancy commenced or renewed on or after the effective date of this Ordinance,
the notice required under clause (i) must be provided in the Rental Agreement.

iv.

Addition of a provision containing the notice required under clause (i) to any new
or renewed Rental Agreement or fixed-term lease constitutes a similar provision for
the purposes of subparagraph (E) of paragraph (1) of subdivision (b).

9)

Housing restricted by deed, regulatory restriction contained in an agreement with
a government agency, or other recorded document as affordable housing for persons
and families of very low, low, or moderate income, as defined in Section 50093 of
the Health and Safety Code, or subject to an agreement that provides housing subsidies
for affordable housing for persons and families of very low, low, or moderate income,
as defined in Section 50093 of the Health and Safety Code or comparable federal statutes.

(f)

An Owner of Residential Real Property subject to this section shall provide notice
to the Tenant as follows:

1)

For any Tenancy commenced or renewed on or after the effective date of this Ordinance,
as an addendum to the lease or Rental Agreement, or as a written notice signed by
the Tenant, with a copy provided to the Tenant.

2)

For a Tenancy existing prior to the effective date of this Ordinance, by written notice
to the Tenant no later than thirty (30) days after the effective date of this Ordinance,
or as an addendum to the lease or Rental Agreement.

3)

The notification or lease provision shall be in no less than 12-point type, and shall
include the following: "The Santa Ana Municipal Code provides that after all of the
Tenants have continuously and lawfully occupied the property for at least thirty (30)
days, an Owner must provide a statement of cause in any notice to terminate a Tenancy.
See Division 2 of Article XIX of Chapter 8 of the Santa Ana Municipal Code for more information."

(g)

It shall be a defense to an action for possession of a Rental Unit under this Division
if a trier of fact determines that:

1)

Both of the following provisions apply:

A.

The Tenant or Tenant's household member is a victim of an act or acts that constitute
domestic violence, elder or dependent adult abuse, sexual assault, human trafficking,
or stalking if the domestic violence, elder or dependent adult abuse, sexual assault,
human trafficking, or stalking has been documented by one of the following:

i.

A temporary restraining order, emergency protective order, or protective order issued
within the last one hundred eighty (180) days pursuant to law that protects the Tenant
or a household member from domestic violence, elder or dependent adult abuse, sexual
assault, human trafficking, or stalking; or

ii.

The Tenant or a member of their household has filed a police report within the previous
one hundred eighty (180) days alleging that they are a victim of domestic violence,
elder or dependent adult abuse, sexual assault, human trafficking, or stalking.

B.

The notice to vacate is substantially based upon the act or acts constituting domestic
violence, elder or dependent adult abuse, sexual assault, human trafficking, or stalking
against the Tenant or their household member, including, but not limited to, an action
for possession based on complaints of noise, disturbances, or repeated presence of
police.

2)

Notwithstanding this Section, an Owner may terminate the Tenancy if:

A.

The Tenant or the person protected by a court order or who filed a police report allows
the person against whom the protective order has been issued or who was named in the
police report as committing an act of domestic violence, elder or dependent adult
abuse, sexual assault, human trafficking, or stalking, to visit the rental property;
or

B.

The Owner reasonably believes the presence of the person against whom the protective
order has been issued or who was named in the police report as having committed an
act of domestic violence, elder or dependent adult abuse, sexual assault, human trafficking,
or stalking poses a physical threat to other Tenants, guests, invitees, or to a Tenant's
right to quiet enjoyment and the Owner previously gave the Tenant a three (3) day
written notice to cease and correct this violation.

3)

The provisions of this Division shall not supersede any other applicable state laws
relating to victims of an act of domestic violence, sexual assault, stalking, human
trafficking, abuse of an elder or a dependent adult, or of other specified crimes,
as provided for in Civil Code section 1946.7 and Code of Civil Procedure sections
1161.3 and 1174.27.

(h)

It shall be a defense to a no fault just cause action for possession of a Rental Unit
under this Division if a person under the age of twenty-one (21) is a resident of
the subject Rental Unit, or has a custodial or family relationship with a Tenant in
the subject Rental Unit, and who is registered and actively attending any level of
school during a specified school term.

(i)

At least sixty (60) days prior to the sale of a Mobilehome Park, the Owner shall provide
notice of such proposed sale to the Mobilehome Park residents and prepare a report
on the impact of the sale of the Mobilehome Park, including a replacement and relocation
plan that adequately mitigates the impact upon the ability of any displaced residents
of the Mobilehome Park to be sold to find adequate housing in a Mobilehome Park, as
applicable.

(j)

Any waiver of the rights under this section shall be void as contrary to public policy.

(Ord. No. NS-3027, § 3, 10-18-22; Ord. No. NS-3052, § 4, 10-17-23; Ord. No. NS-3073, § 1, 11-5-24)

Sec. 8-3121. - Notice of termination of tenancy.

(a)

When terminating a Tenancy either at-fault or no-fault, an Owner must comply with
all of the following:

1)

The Owner must serve a written notice in accordance with Civil Code sections 1946
through 1946.5, to the Tenant that states that, in addition to any information required
by federal or State law, the Owner will terminate the Tenancy, and that indicates
at least one at-fault or no-fault just cause reason as provided in section 8-3120(b); and

2)

The Owner has not accepted and will not accept Rent or any other consideration in
return for the continued use of the Residential Property beyond the term of the terminated
Tenancy in compliance with Civil Code sections 1945 through 1946.5; and

3)

The Owner qualifies the termination as at-fault or no-fault just cause, as specified
in section 8-3120(b); and

4)

The Owner has submitted to the City, within five (5) days after service of the notice
of termination on the Tenant, a true and accurate copy of the Owner's written notice
of termination, and proof of such service, signed under penalty of perjury, on the
Tenant, through the City's Rental Registry portal. The Owner shall maintain proof
of service to the City as evidence that the Owner has complied with this section.

5)

The Owner must provide the notice in the language that the Owner and Tenant used to
negotiate the terms of the Tenancy, in addition to English.

(Ord. No. NS-3027, § 3, 10-18-22; Ord. No. NS-3073, § 1, 11-5-24)

Sec. 8-3122. - Retaliatory eviction and anti-harassment.

(a)

Retaliatory Eviction.

1)

If the main intent of the Owner in terminating a Tenancy or refusing to renew a Tenancy
is retaliatory in nature, and if the Tenant is not in default as to the payment of
Rent, then the Owner may not terminate the Tenancy or refuse to renew the Tenancy
or cause the Tenant to quit involuntarily.

2)

A Tenant may assert retaliation affirmatively or as a defense to the Owner's action
regardless of the period of time which has elapsed between the Tenant's assertion
or exercise of rights under this Article and the alleged act of retaliation.

3)

Retaliation against a Tenant because of the Tenant's exercise of rights under this
Article is prohibited. Retaliation claims may only be brought in court and may not
be addressed administratively. A court may consider the protections afforded by this
Article in evaluating a claim of retaliation.

(b)

Anti-Harassment. No Owner, or any person, acting as a principal or agent, offering
Residential Real Property for rent, or any contractor, subcontractor or employee of
the Owner shall, with respect to Residential Real Property under any Rental Agreement
or other Tenancy or estate at will, however created, do any of the following:

1)

Interrupt, terminate, or fail to provide Housing Services required by Rental Agreement
or by federal, State, County, or local housing, health, or safety laws, or threaten
to do so, or violate or threaten to violate Civil Code section 789.3.

A.

"Interrupt, terminate, or fail to provide Housing Services" in this provision does
not include interruptions, terminations, or failure to provide Housing Services as
a result of interruptions, outages, or terminations caused by events or actions outside
of the Owner's control, such as utility outages caused by natural disaster. Further,
this provision does not include stoppages, outages, terminations, and interruptions
properly noticed to Tenants as required by a signed Rental Agreement.

2)

Take any of the following actions in bad faith:

A.

Fail to perform repairs and maintenance required by Rental Agreement or by federal,
State, or local laws;

B.

Fail to exercise due diligence in completing repairs and maintenance once undertaken;

C.

Fail to follow appropriate industry repair, containment, or remediation protocols
designed to minimize exposure to noise, dust, lead, paint, mold, asbestos, or other
building materials with potentially harmful health impacts;

D.

Conduct elective renovation or construction of unit for the purpose of harassing a
Tenant;

E.

Refuse to acknowledge or accept receipt of a Tenant's lawful Rent payment as set forth
in a Rental Agreement, by usual practice of the parties, or in a notice to pay Rent
or quit;

F.

Refuse to cash or process a Rent check or other form of acceptable Rent payment for
over thirty (30) days after it is tendered;

G.

Fail to maintain a current address for delivery of Rent payments;

H.

Violate a Tenant's right to privacy without limitation, by requesting information
regarding residence or citizenship status, protected class status, or social security
number, except as required by law or in the case of a social security number, for
the purpose of obtaining information for the qualifications for a Tenancy;

I.

Release information protected by the Tenant's right to privacy except as required
or authorized by law; or

J.

Request or demand an unreasonable amount of information from Tenant in response to
a request for reasonable accommodation.

3)

Abuse the right of access into Residential Real Property as established by Civil Code section 1954 or other applicable law. This includes entries for inspections that
are not related to necessary repairs or services; entries excessive in number; entries
that improperly target certain Tenants or are used to collect evidence against the
occupant or otherwise beyond the scope of an otherwise lawful entry; entries or demands
for entry at times outside of normal business hours, unless for health and safety
reasons or if the Tenant agrees otherwise; entries contrary to a Tenant's reasonable
request to change the date or time of entry; photographing or otherwise recording
portions of a Rental Unit that are beyond the scope of lawful entry or inspection;
and misrepresenting the reasons for accessing Residential Real Property.

4)

Influence or attempt to influence a Tenant to vacate Residential Real Property through
fraud, misrepresentation, intimidation or coercion, which shall include threatening
to report a Tenant to the United States Department of Homeland Security.

5)

Threaten the Tenant, by word or gesture, with physical harm, or abuse Tenant with
words, either orally or in writing, which are offensive and inherently likely to provoke
an immediate violent reaction. This includes words used during in-person conversations,
through social media postings or messages, or other communications.

6)

Violate any law which prohibits discrimination based on race, gender, sexual preference,
sexual orientation, ethnic background, nationality, religion, age, parenthood, marriage,
pregnancy, disability, human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)/acquired immune deficiency
syndrome (AIDS), occupancy by a minor child, or source of income.

7)

Take action to terminate any Tenancy including service of any notice to quit or other
eviction notice or bring any action to recover possession of a Rental Unit based upon
facts which the Owner has no reasonable cause to believe to be true or upon a legal
theory which is untenable under the facts known to the Owner. No Owner shall be liable
under this subsection for bringing an action to recover possession unless and until
the Tenant has obtained a favorable termination of that action.

8)

Remove from the Rental Unit personal property, furnishings, or any other items without
the prior written consent of the Tenant, except when done pursuant to enforcement
of a legal termination of Tenancy.

9)

Provide false written or verbal information regarding any federal, State, County,
or local Tenant protections, including mischaracterizing the nature or effect of a
notice to quit or other eviction notice. False information includes, without limitation,
requesting or demanding a Tenant:

A.

Sign a new Rental Agreement not in the Tenant's primary language if:

i.

Rental Agreement negotiations were conducted in the Tenant's primary language;

ii.

The existing Rental Agreement is in the Tenant's primary language; or

iii.

Owner is otherwise aware that the new Rental Agreement is not in Tenant's primary
language.

B.

Enter into a Rent repayment plan if the Owner states, misrepresents, suggests, or
implies, that the Tenant should or must do so to take advantage of Tenant protection
laws that do not in fact require such plans.

10)

Offer payments to:

A.

A Tenant to vacate more than once in six (6) months, after the Tenant has notified
the Owner in writing that the Tenant does not desire to receive further offers of
payments to vacate;

B.

Attempt to coerce Tenant to vacate accompanied with threats or intimidation. This
shall not include settlement offers in pending eviction actions made in good faith
and not accompanied with threats or intimidation.

11)

Communicate with Tenant in a language other than Tenant's primary language for the
purpose of intimidating, confusing, deceiving or annoying Tenant.

12)

Interfere with a Tenant's right to quiet use and enjoyment of a Rental Unit as that
right is defined by law.

13)

Commit repeated acts or omissions of such significance as to substantially interfere
with or disturb the comfort, repose, peace, or quiet of any person lawfully entitled
to occupancy of such Rental Unit and that cause, are likely to cause, or are intended
to cause any person lawfully entitled to occupancy of a Rental Unit to vacate such
Rental Unit or to surrender or waive any rights in relation to such occupancy.

14)

Remove a housing service for the purpose of causing the Tenant to vacate the Residential
Real Property. For example, taking away a parking space knowing that a Tenant cannot
find alternative parking and must move.

15)

Interfere with the right of Tenants to organize as Tenants and engage in concerted
activities with other Tenants for the purpose of mutual aid and protection; provide
property access to Tenant organizers, advocates, or representatives working with or
on behalf of Tenants living at a property; convene Tenant or Tenant organization meetings
in an appropriate space accessible to Tenants under the terms of their Rental Agreement;
or distribute and post literature informing other Tenants of their rights and of opportunities
to involve themselves in their project in common areas, including lobby areas and
bulletin boards.

16)

Threatening or intimidating a Tenant based on their immigration or citizenship status
or otherwise disclosing a Tenant's immigration or citizenship status in violation
of California Civil Code section 1940.35(a) and California Code of Civil Procedure
section 1161.4, as may be amended.

(Ord. No. NS-3027, § 3, 10-18-22; Ord. No. NS-3073, § 1, 11-5-24)

Secs. 8-3123—8-3139. - Reserved.

DIVISION 3. - RENT STABILIZATION

Sec. 8-3140. - Prohibited increases.

(a)

Increases in Rent on Residential Real Property or Mobilehome Spaces in the City of
Santa Ana in excess of three percent (3%), or eighty (80%) of the change in the Consumer
Price Index, whichever is less, and more than one Rent Increase in any twelve (12)
month period, are prohibited, unless expressly exempt under the Costa-Hawkins Rental
Housing Act codified in California Civil Code section 1954.50, et seq., or the Mobilehome Residency Law codified in California Civil Code sections 798, et seq. If the change in the Consumer Price Index is negative, no Rent
Increase is permitted. The term Consumer Price Index means, at the time of the adjustment
calculation completed by the City pursuant to subsection (b), the percentage increase
in the United State Consumer Price Index for all Urban Consumers in the Los Angeles-Long
Beach-Anaheim Metropolitan Area published by the Bureau of Labor Statistics, not seasonally
adjusted, for the most recent twelve (12) month period ending prior to the City's
calculation pursuant to subsection (b). A violation of this section occurs upon the
service of notice or demand for a prohibited increase in Rent.

(b)

No later than June 30 each year, beginning with the year 2022, the City shall announce
the amount of allowable Rent Increase based on subsection (a) herein, which shall
be effective as of September 1 of that year.

(Ord. No. NS-3027, § 3, 10-18-22; Ord. No. NS-3052, § 6, 10-17-23; Ord. No. NS-3073, § 1, 11-5-24)

Sec. 8-3141. - Reasonable rate of return.

This article allows for an annual adjustment of Residential Real Property or Mobilehome
Space Rent of up to three percent (3%), or eighty (80%) of the change in the Consumer
Price Index, whichever is less. A Consumer Price Index-based increase is found and
determined to provide a just and reasonable return on an Owner's property, and has
been adopted to encourage good management, reward efficiency, and discourage the flight
of capital, as well as to be commensurate with returns on comparable investments,
but not so high as to defeat the purpose of curtailing excessive Rents and rental
increases. Notwithstanding the foregoing, however, any Owner of Residential Real Property
or a Mobilehome Park who contends that the limit on rental increases set forth in
Section 8-3140 above will prevent the Owner from receiving a fair and reasonable return on their
property may petition for relief from the cap set forth in section 8-3140 pursuant to the procedures set forth in this Division.

(Ord. No. NS-3027, § 3, 10-18-22; Ord. No. NS-3073, § 1, 11-5-24)

Sec. 8-3142. - Fair return petition for rent increase.

(a)

A Landlord may submit a Fair Return Petition to the Program Administrator in accordance
with the procedures set forth in this Division requesting a Rent Increase in excess
of that provided in this Division in order to obtain a fair and reasonable return
on the Rental Unit.

(b)

Standard of Review. All relevant factors shall be considered when evaluating a Fair
Return Petition, including, but not limited to, the following:

1)

Changes in the Consumer Price Index for All Urban Consumers in the Los Angeles-Long
Beach-Anaheim Metropolitan Area published by the Bureau of Labor Statistics;

2)

The Rent lawfully charged for comparable Rental Units in the City;

3)

The length of time since the last determination on a Fair Return Petition, or the
last Rent Increase if no previous Fair Return Petition has been made;

4)

The completion of any rehabilitation work related to the Rental Unit, and the cost
thereof, including materials, labor, construction interest, permit fees, and other
items deemed appropriate;

5)

Changes in property taxes or other taxes related to the Rental Unit;

6)

Changes in the Rent paid by the Landlord for the lease of the Rental Unit;

7)

Changes in the utility charges for the Rental Unit paid by the Landlord, and the extent,
if any, of reimbursement from the Tenants;

8)

Changes in reasonable Operating Expenses;

9)

Changes in Net Operating Income;

10)

The need for repairs caused by circumstances other than ordinary wear and tear;

11)

The amount and quality of Housing Services provided by the Landlord to the Tenants;

12)

Compliance with any existing Rental Agreement lawfully entered into between the Landlord
and Tenants; and

13)

Landlord's substantial compliance with this Article and applicable housing, health
and safety codes.

(Ord. No. NS-3027, § 3, 10-18-22; Ord. No. NS-3073, § 1, 11-5-24)

Sec. 8-3143. - Capital improvement petition.

(a)

Effective July 1, 2023, or as modified by resolution of the City Council, a Landlord
may submit a Capital Improvement Petition to the Program Administrator in accordance
with the procedures set forth in this Division requesting a pass-through cost to the
Tenants to cover expenses incurred by the Landlord to complete Capital Improvements
for the Rental Unit pursuant to the following provisions:

1)

The Capital Improvement was paid for and completed after November 19, 2021 (the effective
date of the first adopted Rent Stabilization Ordinance);

2)

The Capital Improvement was paid for and completed prior to the filing of the Capital
Improvement Petition;

3)

A Capital Improvement Petition must be initiated by the Landlord within two (2) years
of completion of the Capital Improvement;

4)

A Capital Improvement Petition shall not apply to Rental Units or new Tenants whose
initial Rent was established after the Landlord completed the Capital Improvement;

5)

The Landlord may not require a Tenant to pay any amount of any cost that is attributable
to any period of time that the Tenant was not entitled to use and occupy the Rental
Unit;

6)

The Landlord may not require a Tenant to pay more than the Tenant's share of the cost
attributable to that Tenant's Rental Unit that is permitted to be passed through to
the Tenant;

7)

If the Capital Improvement inures solely to the benefit of one or more of the Rental
Units, but to less than all, the surcharge shall be so annualized, but shall be applied
and/or prorated only with respect to the one or more Rental Units actually so benefited;

8)

Equipment otherwise eligible as a Capital Improvement will not be considered if a
"use fee" is charged (i.e. - coin operated washer and dryers); and,

9)

Pass through costs for Capital Improvements shall not be considered Rent and shall
not be increased when Rent Increases, nor shall they be considered Rent for purposes
of calculating a Rent Increase.

(b)

Calculating Capital Improvements. Any Capital Improvement pass-through cost must be
calculated according to the following:

1)

Capital Improvement costs must be amortized over the useful life of the Capital Improvement,
not to exceed ten percent (10%) of the current Rent; for the purposes of such computation,
the current Rent for any time period shall not include any Capital Improvement pass-through
amounts;

2)

For mixed-use structures and Landlord-occupied Rental Units, only the percent of residential
square footage will be applied in the calculations;

3)

If a unit is occupied by an agent of the Landlord, this unit must be included when
determining the average costs per Rental Unit; and,

4)

If the Landlord is reimbursed for Capital Improvements (i.e. - insurance, court-awarded
damages, subsidies, etc.), such reimbursement must be deducted from the Capital Improvements
before costs are amortized and allocated among the Rental Units.

(c)

Standard of review. All relevant factors shall be considered when evaluating a Capital
Improvement Petition, including the following:

1)

Capital Improvement completed;

2)

Landlord's Petition made within two (2) years of completion of Capital Improvement;

3)

Distinguished from ordinary repair or maintenance;

4)

For the primary benefit, use, and enjoyment of the Tenant;

5)

Permanently fixed in place or relatively immobile and appropriated to the use of the
Rental Unit;

6)

No "use fee" or other charge imposed on Tenants for its use; and,

7)

Cost-factored and amortized.

(Ord. No. NS-3027, § 3, 10-18-22; Ord. No. NS-3073, § 1, 11-5-24)

Sec. 8-3144. - Tenant petition.

(a)

Effective July 1, 2023, or as modified by resolution of the City Council, a Tenant
may submit a Petition to the Program Administrator in accordance with the procedures
set forth in this Division on any one (1) or more of the following grounds:

1)

To request review of a Rent Increase in excess of the maximum allowed Rent Increase;

2)

To request a reduction in Rent based on decreased Housing Services;

3)

To request a reduction in Rent based on failure of the Landlord to maintain a habitable
premises, including health, safety, fire, or building code violations;

4)

To contest a Capital Improvement cost as an unauthorized or excessive pass through;
or,

5)

For any other violation of this Article by the Landlord.

(b)

Tenant's time to file a Petition. Where applicable, a Tenant filing a Petition under
this Division shall do so within the following time limits:

1)

Tenant receiving a notice of Rent Increase shall have thirty (30) days after service
of such notice to file a Petition for review of Rent;

2)

In instances where notice is not provided as required, the Tenant shall file a Petition
for review of Rent within thirty (30) days after Tenant knew of the alleged failure
to comply with the requirements of this Article; and,

3)

For any other violation(s) of this Article by the Landlord, the Tenant shall file
a Petition within one hundred and eighty (180) days of the alleged violation(s).

(c)

Standard of Review. All relevant factors shall be considered when evaluating a Tenant
Petition, including the following:

1)

Landlord allows violations of this Article or other applicable state and local statutes
to persist;

2)

Any reduction of Housing Services, living space, or amenities;

3)

Substantial deterioration of the Rental Unit other than as a result of ordinary wear
and tear;

4)

Landlord's failure to provide adequate Housing Services;

5)

Tenant provided Landlord with reasonable notice and opportunity to correct the conditions
that provide the basis for the petition; and,

6)

Landlord's failure to comply substantially with this Article or applicable housing,
health and safety codes.

(d)

Restoration of Rent Decrease. Where a Rent decrease has been ordered pursuant to this
Division due to a decrease in Housing Services or failure to maintain habitability,
the amount of Rent decreased (return of excess Rent) may be restored in accordance
with procedures set out in the regulations when the former Housing Services or maintenance
levels are reinstated.

(Ord. No. NS-3027, § 3, 10-18-22; Ord. No. NS-3073, § 1, 11-5-24)

Sec. 8-3145. - Petition process.

A Landlord or a Tenant may file Petitions with the Program Administrator, as provided
in this Division. For purposes of this Petition process, the Landlord and each Tenant
of a Rental Unit that is the subject of a Petition shall be a "party" to the Petition.
The Program Administrator shall promulgate regulations regarding procedures for Petitions
filed under this Article. Petitions shall be governed by such regulations and by the
provisions of this Section. Petitions shall be available in the language that the
Owner and Tenant used to negotiate the terms of the Tenancy (e.g., Spanish, Chinese,
Tagalog, Vietnamese and Korean), as well as English.

(a)

Filing Petition. Upon the filing of a Petition, the Program Administrator shall notify the petitioner
of the acceptance or denial of the Petition based on the completeness of the submission.
The Program Administrator shall not assess the merits of the Petition, and shall only
refuse acceptance of a Petition that does not include required information or documentation
or comply with the requirements of this Division.

(b)

Filing Fee. Fees for the filing of any Petition shall be established by City Council resolution
in the City's Miscellaneous Fee Schedule.

(c)

Prior Petition. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Division, no Petition shall proceed if
a decision has been made with regard to a prior Petition based on the same or substantially
the same grounds within the previous one hundred and eighty (180) days.

(d)

No Landlord Petition or upward adjustment of Rent shall be authorized under this Division
if the Landlord:

1)

Has continued to fail to comply, after order of the Board, with any provisions of
this Article and/or orders or regulations issued thereunder by the Board; or

2)

Has failed to bring the Rental Unit into compliance with the implied warranty of habitability.

(e)

Notice of Petition. As soon as possible after acceptance of a Petition, the Program Administrator shall
provide written notice to the Landlord, if the Petition was filed by the Tenant, or
the Tenant, if the Petition was filed by the Landlord, of the receipt of such a Petition.
The written notice shall inform the parties of the Petition process, the right to
respond, and include a copy of the completed Petition and supportive documents. Any
response submitted by the responding party will be made available to the petitioning
party.

(f)

Hearing Officer. An impartial Hearing Officer appointed by the Program Administrator shall conduct
a hearing to act upon the Petition. The Hearing Officer has the following powers:

1)

To make a determination on a Petition; and

2)

Any other powers delegated to the Hearing Officer by the Board.

(g)

Board Action in Lieu of Reference to Hearing Officer. The Board, on its own motion, in the Board's sole discretion, may hold a hearing
on a Petition without the Petition first being heard by a Hearing Officer.

(h)

Time of Hearing. Each accepted Petition shall be scheduled for a hearing by the Hearing Officer to
be held on a date not more than sixty (60) days from the date the Program Administrator
accepts the Petition. With agreement of the parties, the Hearing Officer may hold
the hearing beyond the sixty (60) days. In no event later than ten (10) days prior
to the hearing, the Hearing Officer shall notify all parties as to the time, date,
and place of the hearing.

(i)

Consolidation. All Landlord Petitions pertaining to Tenants in the same building shall be consolidated
for hearing, and all Petitions filed by Tenants occupying the same building shall
be consolidated for hearing, unless the Program Administrator or Hearing Officer finds
good cause not to consolidate such Petitions.

(j)

Right of Assistance. All parties to a hearing may have assistance in presenting evidence and developing
their position from attorneys, legal workers, or any other persons designated by said
parties.

(k)

Rules of Evidence. Formal rules of evidence shall not be applicable to hearings on Petitions. At such
a hearing, the parties may offer any documents, testimony, written declarations, or
other evidence that, in the opinion of the Hearing Officer, is credible and relevant
to the Petition. The Hearing Officer may consider the results of inspections of the
property in question and the results of any other investigations conducted by or at
the request of the Hearing Officer or Program Administrator. Evidence unduly repetitious,
lacking credibility, or irrelevant evidence shall be excluded upon order by the Hearing
Officer.

(l)

Evidence. Any party may appear and offer such documents, testimony, written declarations, or
other evidence as may be pertinent to the proceeding. The Hearing Officer may require
either party to a Petition to provide any books, records, or papers deemed pertinent,
in addition to that information contained in the Petition and Rental Registry. The
Hearing Officer may request the City to conduct a current building inspection if the
Hearing Officer finds good cause to believe the current information does not reflect
the current condition of the Rental Unit. All documents required under this section
shall be made available to the parties involved prior to the hearing. In cases where
information filed in a Petition or in additional submissions filed at the request
of the Hearing Officer is inadequate or false, no action shall be taken on said Petition
until the deficiency is remedied.

(m)

Quantum of Proof. The party who files the Petition shall have the burden of proof. No Petition shall
be granted unless supported by the preponderance of the evidence submitted at the
hearing.

(n)

Time for Decision. The policies and procedures adopted by the Board shall provide for final action on
any Petition within a reasonable time.

(o)

Notice of Decision. The Hearing Officer shall make a determination on the merits of the Petition and
shall provide a written statement of decision, including findings upon which the determination
is based. The Hearing Officer's decision on a Petition may be reasonably conditioned
in any manner necessary to effectuate the purposes of this Article. Additionally,
the parties to the hearing shall also be notified of their right to any appeal allowed
by the Board and/or to judicial review of the decision pursuant to this Division.

(p)

Hearing Record. The record of the hearing shall include: the Petition; all exhibits, papers, and
documents required to be filed or accepted into evidence during the proceedings; a
list of participants present; a summary of all testimony accepted in the proceedings;
a statement of all materials officially noticed; all recommended decisions, orders
and/or rulings; all final decisions, orders and/or rulings; and the reasons for each
final decision, order and/or ruling. All hearings shall be recorded.

(q)

Appeal. Any person aggrieved by the decisions of the Hearing Officer may appeal to the Board.
An appeal to the Board shall be filed no later than thirty (30) days after receipt
of the notice of the decision of the Hearing Officer. On appeal, the Board shall affirm,
reverse, or modify the decision of the Hearing Officer. Unless the Board elects to
conduct a de novo hearing, Board review of the Hearing Officer's decision shall be
based on the hearing record without holding a new hearing. The Board may consider
additional evidence for good cause, including evidence which did not exist at the
time of the hearing or which could not be discovered using due diligence by a party.
If no Board exists, any appeal of the Hearing Officer decision on a Petition shall
proceed pursuant to the administrative appeal procedures found in Chapter 3 of the Santa Ana Municipal Code.

(r)

Finality of Decision. The decision of the Hearing Officer shall be the final decision of the Board in the
event of no appeal to the Board. The decision of the Hearing Officer shall not be
stayed pending appeal; however, in the event that the Board on appeal reverses or
modifies the decision of the Hearing Officer, the Board shall order the appropriate
party to make retroactive payments, as applicable, to restore the parties to the position
they would have occupied had the Hearing Officer's decision been the same as that
of the Board.

(Ord. No. NS-3027, § 3, 10-18-22; Ord. No. NS-3073, § 1, 11-5-24)

Sec. 8-3146. - Voluntary mediation.

(a)

Voluntary mediation services shall be provided by the City. Upon request, the Program
Administrator shall appoint a Mediator and set a date for a mediation no later than
thirty (30) days after the acceptance of the subject Petition, unless the Program
Administrator determines that additional time is required under the circumstances.
The Program Administrator shall notify the Landlord and Tenant(s) in writing of the
date, time, and place of the mediation hearing at least ten (10) days prior to the
mediation. This notice shall be served either in person or through ordinary mail or
electronic correspondence.

(b)

It is the intent and purpose of mediation to provide a process in which Mediators
may assist disputants in reaching a voluntary agreement. Accordingly, except as otherwise
expressly provided herein, there shall be no penalty or disability, either civil or
criminal, for failure to participate in the mediation process, and there shall be
no penalty, either civil or criminal, for failure to reach agreement with a disputant
in the mediation process.

(c)

Mediation is a voluntary collaborative process wherein the Landlord and Tenant(s)
who have a disagreement can develop options, consider alternatives, and develop a
consensual agreement. The role of the Mediator is to facilitate open communication
to resolve a dispute in a non-adversarial and confidential manner.

(d)

If the Landlord and Tenant agree to a resolution, the Mediator may assist the parties
in preparing a written settlement agreement for the signature of the Landlord and
the Tenant, provided that in doing so the Mediator confines the assistance to stating
the settlement as determined by the parties. Such agreement shall constitute a legally
enforceable contract.

(e)

Should the parties fail to agree to a resolution, or the Mediator determines that
the parties have reached an impasse, the Mediator may refer the Petition back to the
Program Administrator to continue the Petition review process detailed in this Division.

(f)

All documents and results related to mediations and facilitations held pursuant to
this Article shall be kept confidential and shall be inadmissible as evidence in any
subsequent administrative or judicial proceeding.

(g)

The Mediator and/or Program Administrator shall provide documentation and translation
services in the language that the Owner and Tenant used to negotiate the terms of
the Tenancy (e.g., Spanish, Chinese, Tagalog, Vietnamese and Korean), as well as English.

(Ord. No. NS-3027, § 3, 10-18-22; Ord. No. NS-3073, § 1, 11-5-24)

Sec. 8-3147. - Exemptions.

(a)

Pursuant to the Costa-Hawkins Rental Housing Act, the provisions of this ordinance
regulating the amount of Rent that a Residential Real Property Owner may charge shall
not apply to the following: any Residential Real Property that has a certificate of
occupancy issued after February 1, 1995 (California Civil Code section 1954.52(a)(1)); and, any other provisions of the Costa-Hawkins Rental Housing
Act addressing exemptions, as applicable.

(b)

Pursuant to the Mobilehome Residency Law, the provisions of this ordinance regulating
the amount of Rent that a Mobilehome Park Owner may charge for a Mobilehome Space
shall not apply to the following: any Mobilehome Space subject to a long term (more
than one year) Rental Agreement (California Civil Code section 798.17); any newly constructed Mobilehome Space first offered for rent on
or after January 1, 1990 (California Civil Code section 798.45); Mobilehomes not being used as a person's primary residence that
are not being leased to someone else (California Civil Code section 798.21); and, any other provisions of the Mobilehome Residency Law addressing
exemptions, as applicable.

(c)

Pursuant to the Tenant Protection Act of 2019, Civil Code section 1947.12(d), the provisions of this ordinance regulating the amount of Rent
that a Residential Real Property Owner may charge shall not apply to the following:

(1)

Housing restricted by deed, regulatory restriction contained in an agreement with
a government agency, or other recorded document as affordable housing for persons
and families of very low, low, or moderate income, as defined in Section 50093 of
the Health and Safety Code, or subject to an agreement that provides housing subsidies
for affordable housing for persons and families of very low, low, or moderate income,
as defined in Section 50093 of the Health and Safety Code or comparable federal statutes.

(2)

Dormitories owned and operated by an institution of higher education or a kindergarten
and grades 1 to 12, inclusive, school.

(3)

Housing that has been issued a certificate of occupancy within the previous fifteen
(15) years.

(4)

Residential Real Property that is alienable separate from the title to any other dwelling
unit, provided that both of the following apply:

A.

The Owner is not any of the following:

i.

A real estate investment trust, as defined in section 856 of the Internal Revenue
Code.

ii.

A corporation.

iii.

A limited liability company in which at least one (1) member is a corporation.

B.

i.

The Tenants have been provided written notice that the Residential Real Property is
exempt from this section using the following statement:

"This property is not subject to the Rent limits imposed by Santa Ana Municipal Code
section 8-3140 and the Owner is not any of the following: (1) a real estate investment trust, as
defined by section 856 of the Internal Revenue Code; (2) a corporation; or (3) a limited
liability company in which at least one (1) member is a corporation."

ii.

For a Tenancy existing before the effective date of this ordinance, the notice required
under clause (i) may, but is not required to be provided in the Rental Agreement.

iii.

For a Tenancy commenced or renewed on or after the effective date of this ordinance,
the notice required under clause (i) must be provided in the Rental Agreement.

(5)

A property containing two (2) separate dwelling units within a single structure in
which the Owner occupied one (1) of the units as the Owner's principal place of residence
at the beginning of the Tenancy so long as the Owner continues in occupancy, and neither
unit is an accessory dwelling unit or a junior accessory dwelling unit.

(Ord. No. NS-3027, § 3, 10-18-22; Ord. No. NS-3073, § 1, 11-5-24)

Sec. 8-3148. - Rent increase ineffective.

No Rent Increase shall be effective if the Owner:

(a)

Fails to substantially comply with all provisions of this Division, including but
not limited to the failure to provide notices as required; or

(b)

Fails to maintain the Residential Real Property or Mobilehome Space in compliance
with California Civil Code Sections 1941.1 et seq. and California Health and Safety
Code sections 17920.3 and 17920.10, except as to Mobilehomes and Mobilehome Spaces
in Mobilehome Parks that are subject to the Mobilehome Parks Act, Health and Safety
Code section 18200, et seq.; Manufactured Housing Act, Health and Safety Code section
18000, et seq.; or the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards
Act of 1974, 42 U.S.C. sections 5401, et seq., as applicable; or

(c)

Fails to make repairs ordered by the City or court of competent jurisdiction.

(d)

No Rent Increases shall take effect for any Rental Unit unless the Landlord has accurately
completed the Rental Unit Registration.

(Ord. No. NS-3027, § 3, 10-18-22; Ord. No. NS-3073, § 1, 11-5-24)

Sec. 8-3149. - Notice requirements.

(a)

An Owner of any Residential Real Property or Mobilehome Space subject to this provision
shall, on or before the date of commencement of a Tenancy, give the Tenant a written
notice in a form prescribed by the City which must include the following information:

(1)

The existence and scope of this Division 3 of Article XIX of Chapter 8 of the Santa Ana Municipal Code; and

(2)

The Tenant's right to respond to any Fair Return or Capital Improvement Petition filed
with the City by the Owner pursuant to this Division.

(b)

As part of any notice to increase Rent, an Owner must include:

(1)

Notice of the existence of this Division 3 of Article XIX of Chapter 8 of the Santa Ana Municipal Code; and

(2)

The Tenant's right to respond to any Fair Return or Capital Improvement Petition filed
with the City by the Owner pursuant to this Division, unless such Rent Increase is
pursuant to an approved Fair Return Petition.

(3)

No Rent Increase shall take effect until the requirements of this Division have been
met.

(c)

The Owner must give notices to the Tenant in the language that the Owner and Tenant
used to negotiate the terms of the Tenancy (e.g., English, Spanish, Chinese, Tagalog,
Vietnamese, and Korean) as well as English.

(d)

Any notices or documents required to be provided from a Landlord to a Tenant by this
Article or any other federal, state, or local law, including, but not limited to,
notice of Rent Increase and notice of eviction, shall be provided to the City through
the Rental Registry portal.

(Ord. No. NS-3027, § 3, 10-18-22; Ord. No. NS-3073, § 1, 11-5-24)

Secs. 8-3150—8-3159. - Reserved.

DIVISION 4. - RENTAL REGISTRY AND RENTAL REGISTRY FEE

Sec. 8-3160. - Rental registry.

Effective July 1, 2023, or as modified by resolution of the City Council, the City
shall create a Rental Registry and all Landlords with Rental Units in the City of
Santa Ana shall complete and submit Registration Forms for each Rental Unit pursuant
to the following:

(a)

Initial Registration. A Landlord must file an initial Registration Form with the City
for each Rental Unit that is subject to the provisions of this Article. Registration
of a Rental Unit shall not be complete until an Owner has:

1)

Completely and accurately provided a Registration Form; and,

2)

Paid all fees owed to the City with respect to the Rental Unit including Registration
Fees imposed pursuant to this Article. (b) Change of Ownership or Management.

1)

Whenever a change in ownership of a Rental Unit occurs, the Landlord shall provide
the City with written notice of the change in ownership, including the date of transfer,
and the name, address and contact information of the new Owner, within thirty (30)
days of the close of escrow.

2)

The new Owner is required to file a Registration Form with the City within sixty (60)
days of such change. The new Owner's Registration Form will only be accepted by the
City if it is accompanied by a copy of a written notification on a form prescribed
by the Program Administrator from the Landlord to all Tenants advising the Tenants
of the change in ownership of the building and setting forth the name, address and
contact information of the new Owner and of the new Owner's property manager or representative,
and a declaration that the new Owner served the written notification on all the Tenants.

3)

Registration amendments also shall be required to be filed with the City within sixty
(60) days of a change of the property management or authorized agent or if the address
of the Owner or authorized agent changes.

(c)

Re-Registration Following a Vacancy. A Landlord shall, in the manner described herein,
re-register a Rental Unit with the City within thirty (30) days after a vacancy has
occurred and the Rental Unit is re-rented.

(d)

Claim of Exemption. Any Landlord that is claiming any exemption from this Article
must file a claim of exemption with the City. The Landlord shall provide the City,
on a form approved by the Program Administrator and accompanied by supporting documentation,
a written declaration stating the facts which support the claim of exemption from
the provisions of this Article. If the written declaration and supporting documents
are not submitted by July 1 of each year for any Rental Unit, that Rental Unit shall
be deemed to be subject to the provisions of this Article. If the Board determines
that any Unit was incorrectly registered as exempt due to any affirmative misrepresentation
by the Owner, the exemption for that Unit may be revoked retroactively, and the Unit
will be subject to any applicable enforcement measures.

(e)

Termination of Exemption. Any time a Rental Unit that has been exempted under the
provisions of this Article loses its exempt status due to termination of the conditions
qualifying it for exemption, the Landlord of such Rental Unit is required to file
a Registration Form for said Rental Unit within thirty (30) days of the change in
status.

(f)

Annual Requirement. For the subsequent years after the initial Registration date,
each Registration Form and claims of exemption(s) must be annually filed on or before
July 1 of each year. The Rental Housing Board may modify the annual registration date.

(g)

Contents of Registration Form. The Rental Registration Form shall completely and accurately
provide the following information from the Landlord for each Rental Unit as of the
date of filing the Registration Form:

1)

Address of each Rental Unit including identifying number or letter;

2)

Number of bedrooms and bathrooms in the Rental Unit;

3)

Name, current address, and contact information of current Owners, authorized representatives
and property managers;

4)

Date of assumption of ownership by current Owners;

5)

Current Rent;

6)

Date and amount of last Rent Increase; and

7)

Move-in date of current Tenant(s).

The Board and/or Program Administrator may adopt policies and procedures that require
additional information to be collected and recorded in Registration Forms in furtherance
of the objectives of this Article.

(h)

Affidavit. All Rental Registration Forms provided by Landlords in accordance with
this Division shall include an affidavit signed by the Landlord declaring under penalty
of perjury that the information provided in the Rental Registration Form is true and
correct.

(i)

Notices. Any notices or documents required to be provided from a Landlord to a Tenant
by this Article or any other federal, state, or local law, including, but not limited
to, notice of Rent Increase and notice of eviction, shall be provided to the City
through the Rental Registry portal.

(j)

Proper Registration. Registration of a Rental Unit shall not be complete until the
Landlord has:

1)

Paid all fees and penalties owed to the City with respect to the Rental Unit, including
the Rental Registry Fee, imposed pursuant to this Article; and,

2)

Filed a complete and accurate Registration Form for that Rental Unit including all
information required by this Division and any policies and procedures adopted by the
Board and/or Program Administrator.

(k)

Commencing October 1, 2023, the City may commence enforcement against any Landlord
who fails to register a Rental Unit, or provide current and accurate data regarding
a Rental Unit, according to this Division. Furthermore, no Landlord shall advertise
for rent, demand or accept Rent for a Rental Unit, or evict any Tenant from a Rental
Unit, if the Rental Unit Registration is not complete and accurate. In addition, no
petition, application, claim or request, and no Rent increases shall take effect for
any Rental Unit unless the Landlord has accurately completed the Rental Unit Registration.

(Ord. No. NS-3027, § 3, 10-18-22; Ord. No. NS-3052, § 7, 10-17-23; Ord. No. NS-3073, § 1, 11-5-24)

Sec. 8-3161. - Rental registry fee.

Effective July 1, 2023, or as modified by resolution of the City Council, an annual
Rental Registry Fee shall be imposed on each Rental Unit in the City. All Landlords
with Rental Units that are subject to this Article shall pay the Rental Registry Fee
as established by the City Council. The Rental Registry Fee is to fund the City's
cost to implement, administer, monitor, support, and enforce the provisions of this
Article.

(a)

Amount of Fee. A Landlord shall pay to the City a Rental Registry Fee for each of
the Landlord's Rental Units in the City. The amount of the Fee shall be determined
by resolution of the City Council adopted from time to time and set forth in the City's
Miscellaneous Fee Schedule. The Fee shall not exceed the amount found by the City
Council to be necessary to administer the provisions of this Article, and the City
Council's findings in this regard shall be final.

(b)

Deadline for Landlord Payment of Rental Registry Fee. Annual Rental Registry Fees
shall be due and owing on July 1 each year, or within thirty (30) calendar days of
any subsequent changes to the Rental Unit.

(c)

Late Payment. Any Landlord responsible for paying the Rental Registry Fee who fails
to pay the Fee by October 1, or within sixty (60) calendar days of any mid-year due
date, will be delinquent and shall, in addition to the Fee, pay additional late charges,
penalties of assessments as determined by resolution of the City Council. The amount
of Rental Registry Fee and any penalty imposed by the provisions of this Article shall
be deemed a debt to the City.

(d)

Pass Through to Tenants. After timely payment of the Rental Registry Fee, the Landlord
may pass through up to fifty percent (50%) of the Fee to Tenants of the applicable
Rental Unit, to be paid by the Tenant in twelve (12) equal monthly installments. The
Fee pass-through shall not be considered part of the Rent in calculating any Rent
Increase. If a Landlord fails to timely pay the Fee and becomes delinquent, neither
the Fee nor any penalties can be passed through to the Tenant. In the event a Tenant
paid Registration Fee pass-through costs in excess of that permitted by this Division,
the Landlord shall reimburse the Tenant for the Registration Fee pass-through cost
overpayment.

1)

No Pass-Through for Subsidized Tenants. No portion of the Registration Fee may be
passed through to Tenants who reside in housing restricted by deed, regulatory restriction
contained in an agreement with a government agency, or other recorded document as
affordable housing for persons and families of very low, low, or moderate income,
as defined in Section 50093 of the Health and Safety Code, or subject to an agreement
that provides housing subsidies for affordable housing for persons and families of
very low, low, or moderate income, as defined in Section 50093 of the Health and Safety
Code or comparable federal statutes.

(Ord. No. NS-3027, § 3, 10-18-22; Ord. No. NS-3052, § 8, 10-17-23; Ord. No. NS-3073, § 1, 11-5-24)

Sec. 8-3162. - Education and outreach.

The Program Administrator shall have the authority to contract with community-based
organizations for them to assist in the education and outreach related to this Article.

(Ord. No. NS-3027, § 3, 10-18-22; Ord. No. NS-3073, § 1, 11-5-24)

Secs. 8-3163—8-3179. - Reserved.

DIVISION 5. - RENTAL HOUSING BOARD

Sec. 8-3180. - Rental housing board.

There is hereby created and established a Rental Housing Board to perform the functions
designated in this Article. The composition of the Board and selection of Board Members
shall be based upon the following:

(a)

Membership of Board. The Rental Housing Board shall consist of seven (7) Board Members.
Each City Councilmember shall appoint one (1) Board Member, to be approved by the
City Council, in an equitable order based upon a random lottery process. The Board
Members of the Rental Housing Board shall be comprised of:

1)

Three (3) Tenants, including at least one (1) Mobilehome Tenant;

2)

Two (2) Landlords; and

3)

Two (2) at-large Members with no financial interest in and no ownership of income-generating
rental housing.

(b)

Chairperson. The Board shall elect annually one of its Members to serve in the capacity
as Chairperson.

(c)

Eligibility. Residents of the City are eligible to serve as members of the Board.

(d)

Full Disclosure of Holdings. Nominees for the position of Board Member shall submit
a verified statement listing all of their interests and dealings in real property,
including, but not limited to, ownership, sale or management of real property during
the previous three (3) years. The Board may promulgate additional regulations.

(e)

Conflict of Interest. Board Members shall be subject to the requirements of the California
Political Reform Act and other applicable state and local conflict of interest codes.
Accordingly, a Board member shall be disqualified from participating in any hearing
on an application, petition, or appeal where the Board Member is either the Landlord
or a Tenant residing at the subject property, or has any other form of conflict of
interest.

(f)

Training Required. All Board members shall attend training as designated by the Program
Administrator.

(Ord. No. NS-3027, § 3, 10-18-22; Ord. No. NS-3052, § 9, 10-17-23; Ord. No. NS-3073, § 1, 11-5-24)

Sec. 8-3181. - Rental housing board member term and compensation.

(a)

Term. Board Members shall serve for a term of four (4) years or until their respective
successors are appointed or qualified, but in no event shall any persons be eligible
for reappointment who has served three (3) consecutive terms of four (4) years each,
irrespective of what seat or seats the Board Member is appointed to by the City Council.
However, the City Council may remove a Board Member at any time for any reason.

(b)

Compensation. Fifty dollars ($50.00) per meeting, plus fifty dollars ($50.00) per
month automobile allowance.

(Ord. No. NS-3027, § 3, 10-18-22; Ord. No. NS-3073, § 1, 11-5-24)

Sec. 8-3182. - Rental housing board powers and duties.

(a)

The Rental Housing Board shall have the following powers and duties:

1)

To hold regular meetings at least once each calendar month, or as needed, as fixed
by the by-laws of the Board.

2)

Conduct hearings on petitions, applications, and appeals of hearings determined by
a Hearing Officer submitted by Landlords or Tenants under this Article. Any fees for
such hearings shall be established by City Council resolution in the City's Miscellaneous
Fee Schedule.

3)

Promulgate and implement policies and procedures for the administration and enforcement
of this Article. Make such studies, surveys, and investigations, conduct such hearings,
and obtain such information as is necessary to carry out its powers and duties.

4)

Review and assess yearly that sufficient number of staff are employed, including a
Program Administrator, Hearing Officers, housing counselors and legal staff, as may
be necessary to perform its function efficiently in order to fulfill the purpose of
this Article.

5)

Any other duties as necessary to administer and enforce this Article.

6)

Such other duties as are designated by resolution of the City Council.

(Ord. No. NS-3027, § 3, 10-18-22; Ord. No. NS-3073, § 1, 11-5-24)

Sec. 8-3183. - Rental housing board policies and procedures.

The Board shall issue and follow such policies and procedures, including those which
are contained in this Article, as will further the purposes of the Article.

(Ord. No. NS-3027, § 3, 10-18-22; Ord. No. NS-3073, § 1, 11-5-24)

Sec. 8-3184. - Rental housing board meetings.

(a)

The Board shall hold such regularly scheduled meetings as are necessary to ensure
the timely performance of its duties under this Article. All regular and special meetings
shall be called and conducted in accordance with state law.

(b)

Quorum. Four (4) members of the Board shall constitute a quorum for the transaction
of business.

(c)

Voting. The affirmative vote of four (4) members of the Board is required for a decision,
including all motions, rules, regulations, and orders of the Board.

(Ord. No. NS-3027, § 3, 10-18-22; Ord. No. NS-3073, § 1, 11-5-24)

Sec. 8-3185. - Judicial review.

Any decision of the Rental Housing Board shall be final unless judicial review is
sought in a court of competent jurisdiction within thirty (30) days of the date of
the Board's decision. The Board decision shall take effect immediately unless provided
otherwise in the decision, regardless of whether a party seeks judicial review.

(Ord. No. NS-3027, § 3, 10-18-22; Ord. No. NS-3073, § 1, 11-5-24)

Secs. 8-3186—8-3199. - Reserved.

DIVISION 6. - ENFORCEMENT AND REMEDIES

Sec. 8-3200. - Violations.

(a)

It shall be unlawful for any person to violate or fail to comply with any provision
of this Article. The violation of any provision of this Article shall first be punished
through the use of an administrative citation, as provided in Santa Ana Municipal
Code section 1-21, et seq., prior to prosecution as a misdemeanor or infraction, as provided in Santa
Ana Municipal Code section 1-8.

(b)

Civil Action. Any aggrieved person, including the City and the People of the State of California,
may bring a civil action for damages for any violation of this Article or the rules,
regulations, orders and decisions of the Rental Housing Board. The burden of proof
in such cases shall be by a preponderance of the evidence. No administrative remedy
need be exhausted prior to filing a civil suit pursuant to this section.

(c)

Injunctive Relief. Any person who commits an act, proposes to commit an act, or engages in any pattern
and practice that violates this Division, or the policies, procedures, regulations,
rules, orders and decisions of the Rental Housing Board, may be enjoined therefrom
by any court of competent jurisdiction. An action for injunction under this section
may be brought by any aggrieved person, including the City and People of the State
of California. No administrative remedy need be exhausted prior to filing an action
for injunctive relief pursuant to this section.

(d)

Affirmative Defense. A Landlord's failure to comply with any requirement of this Article may be asserted
as a complete affirmative defense in an unlawful detainer or any other action brought
by the Landlord to recover possession of the Rental Unit. Additionally, any attempt
to recover possession of a Rental Unit in violation of this Article shall render the
Landlord liable to the Tenant for damages in a civil action for wrongful eviction.
The prevailing party in an action for wrongful eviction shall recover costs and reasonable
attorneys' fees.

(e)

Public Nuisance. In addition to other penalties provided by law, any condition caused or permitted
to exist in violation of any provision of this Article shall be deemed a public nuisance
and may be summarily abated as such by the City, and each day such condition continues
shall constitute a new and separate offense.

(f)

Non-Exclusive. The remedies provided in this Article are not exclusive, and nothing in this Article
shall preclude any person from seeking any other remedies, penalties or procedures
provided by law, nor is exhaustion of remedies under this section a prerequisite to
the assertion of any other such right.

(Ord. No. NS-3027, § 3, 10-18-22; Ord. No. NS-3073, § 1, 11-5-24)

Secs. 8-3201—8-3299. - Reserved.
